Region>VPC>AZ>Subnet
AWS CloudFront:multiple acc and region, hlp files available from data center to edhe loc.
Cloud Foundation:Guide to help deploy config,
Global services:AIM,  CloudFront, Route53, Web app firewall
Both User and AWS generated tags must be activated before they appear in Cost Explorer.


Well Arch framework(pillars)
	- Operational Excellence:Running and monitoring systems, responding to events, define standards
	- Security:protecting information and system.
	- Reliability:workloads and quick recovery from failures. adapting to change req.
	- Performance Efficency:structured and streamlined allocation of resources. monitoring
	- Cost optimization:avoiding unnecessary cost, scaling without overspending.
	- Sustainibility:minimum env impact on cloud workload, shared responsibility, reduce downstream impact.				

Rout 53
	- Simple:for single resource
	- Failover routing policy – Use when you want to configure active-passive failover. You can use failover routing to create records in a private hosted zone.
	- Geolocation routing policy – Use when you want to route traffic based on the location of your users. You can use geolocation routing to create records in a private hosted zone.
	- Geoproximity routing policy – Use when you want to route traffic based on the location of your resources and, optionally, shift traffic from resources in one location to resources in another location.
	- Latency routing policy – Use when you have resources in multiple AWS Regions and you want to route traffic to the Region that provides the best latency. You can use latency routing to create records in a private hosted zone.
	- IP-sed routing policy – Use when you want to route traffic based on the location of your users, and have the IP addresses that the traffic originates from.
	- Multivalue answer routing policy – Use when you want Route 53 to respond to DNS queries with up to eight healthy records selected at random. You can use multivalue answer routing to create records in a private hosted zone.
	- Weighted routing policy – Use to route traffic to multiple resources in proportions that you specify.
	
Cloud Adoptation Framework
	- Business
	- People
	- Governence
	- Platform
	- Security
	- Operation
	
Gateway time for AWS storage Gateway service
	- Tape, file, volume
Subnet type:
	- Public, Private , VPN only and Isolated
	
Sensitive data discovery and protection : AWS Macie, une ML to identify and protect sensitive data
Amazon Inspector:automated service that improves security and compliance on ec2
Amazon GuardDuty: Threat detection service. Account level access and not for instance and os, monitors malicious activity. monitors logs for threat, take actions
Amazon Shield: DDoS protection service, on all resource and not instance and os level. (route 53 and global accelerator)
AWS WEB Application firewall: 
AWS Cloudtrail: Log, monitor and retain account activity, compliance audit, historical configuration available.
AWS CloudWatch: Monitoring and observation service for devops and IT managers, creates alarm, 
Amazon Inspector:Auto inspects services/apps for exposures and vulnemrabilities, integrate security to dev ops, streamline compliance and standards
AWS Xray: to debug and analyze performance of serverless application 
Amazon Kendra: intel. search service powered by ML, NLP, any unstructured doc it can search within
Amazon Personalize: Ready to use ML model for recommendation, can build app around it.
Amazon Comprehend: NLP service from 
Amazon Lex:conversational interface | Transcribe: Audio to text



EFS encryption enabled by default:
Alerts user if utilization increases the threshold: AWS Budget
Instance store: Provides instance block level storage
EFS:File system, can be accessed by multiple ec2, what if in different Region or AZ?
Ec2 Dedicated host: Allows you to use other software liscences also compliances.
aws Transcribe:Speech to text | aws Polly : text to speech
Weighted routing in Route53 : works as load balancer
ECS-Fargate Laungh Type:Serverless compute engine for container. with both ECS and Kubernates-gives workload isolation and 
	no need to worry about scalingand server provisioning
EC2 On-Demand:Full lifecycel control, no upfront payment only on used time.
AWS Local Zones:Lets select sotarge/cpmpute in close to end user for low latency.
AWS EdgeLoaction: Site used by CloudFrontto use cached copiesfor faster deliver
AWS Wavelength:used for app that need ultra low latency alternative
AWS Images: Region specific?
AWS EFS:Scalable, elastic NFS file sys.scales on demand, parallel shared access to thousands of ec2 from diff AZ Region and VPC
Amazon ElastiCache:Low latency in memory datastore.Gaming, Real time analytics
AWS EC2 pricing
	- RI:Max discount is 72%
	- On-Demand: pay by compute cap byhour or second
	- On-Spot:spare EC2 compute cap, upto 90% discount, can be intrrupted.
	- Savings Plan: commitment to consistent use, billed per hour for 1 OR 3 yr term
	- Dedicated hosts:is dedicated machine
AWS S3 TA(Transfer Acceleration)fast and secure transfer of files, takes advantage of cloud front.
AWS CodeDeploy: automates code deployment on ec2 and on premice also


Amazon DynamoDB with global tables: Scales across regions too, least operational overhead, key val and document, adaptable to business change, no fixed cols
Amazon S3: Object storage
Amazon Neptune: Fully managed DB service for graph application.
AWS product team auto apply patch and change to OS
APN Consulting partner provides expert advice in migration
Aws Artifact:provides HIPAA and governence report docs
AWS Region has 1 or mnore discrete datacenters and 3 or more AZ
RDS depl:
	- MultiAZ:High Avaibality
	- Multi Region:disaster recovery and performance
	- Read Replica:scability
Amazon EMR: cloud bid data platform for processing huge data using open source tools
AWS Step Functions:combination of multiple serverless services stiched together
AWS Batch:Plan, schedule and execute batch processing. takes care of provision and job distribution based on volume. 
Amazon Global Accelerator:global app availability and performance, provides static IP addres as as fixed point entry

AWS Support plan: Business(guide for specific usecase) and Enterprise support provides guidence, config and troubleshooting with other tools
	- Business support:prod workload and 24/7 tech and arch support 
	- Enterprise:24/7 + tools to auto manage health with guidence and designated TAM-tech acc manager and SME, costly that Business
	- Enterprise on ramp:critical workload
	- Developer support: for early dev, email & chat based support, no 24/7 support.
	

AWS VPC:Can provision logically isolated section of cloud.
Internet Gateway: VPC component let you connect VPC
AWS Transit Gateway:Connects VPC and on premice network through a central hub. act as cloud router.
VPC Endpoint: privately connect to vpc to aws service, without internet gateway, NAT, VPN, or AWS DC
AWS Direct Connect : dedicated network from on premice to aws, vpc, takes time tosetup.
AWS TransitGateway:connects VPC and on premice with central hub, acts as cloud router
Amazon API Gateway: Acts like fron door for app

AWS Secret Manager:Like Cyberark. manages DB cred and API keys
AWS CLoud HSM:Hardware security module:Security assesment, automates generate and use encryption keys
AWS KMS:(Key Management Service) create and manage cryptographic keys.
AWS Service Health dashboard:Availability and operations of services, for status
AWS Account HElath Dashboard: Allert and guidance about events that can effect.

Amazon Redshift: Handels large petabyte scale data warehousing from different sources like s3, access and analyze data without all of the configurations of a provisioned data warehouse
AWS Glue: Extract, manage and load data for process
AWS Storage Gateway: Hybrid storagethat connects on-premice with aws cloud
AWS Services that support reservation to optimize cost: RDS DynamoDB EC2
AWS Service that support only basic level: AWS Delveloper and AWS Basec support
AWS Syetem Manager Session Manager:Interactive browser based shell and CLI experience.manage ssh keys
AWS Instance COnnect:Secure way to connect linux instance using sshport 22 has to be unused 
AWS Trusted Advisor: provides realtime guidence to help provison resources on cost optimization,fault tollerence, security


AWS Pinpoint: Captures customers data in real time to deliver insights
AWS CloudFormation: can help provision services just by text file or programably-kinda automation
AWS Opswork:Configuration managementservice taht provides instance of Chef and Puppet(automation platform)
Amazon Kinesis Data Stream: Enables to build custom app which works on streaming data
Horizontal scale:aaddding more comp to system
Veriticle scale:adding cores, mem, storage to same system

AWS Pricing calculator:create an estimate ofr your use scenario:
AWS Budget:sets custom budget alerts, monthly quaterly or yearly level
AWS Cost Explorer: Explore cost at high level, 
AWS Organization: Centralize billing, access, compliance, single payment option.

AWS web application firewall: helps to configure rule that allow block or monitor based on condition we define
AWS Athena:helps you analyze unstructured, semi-structured, and structured data stored in Amazon S3, SQL based
AWS Aurora:provides built-in security, continuous backups, serverless compute, up to 15 read replicas, automated multi-Region replication, and integrations
Amazon Dynamo

Amazon MQ : message broker
Amazon EMR:Elastic Map Reduce: managed cluster plateform to run bid data framework
AWS Storage
AWS Lusture File System:Optimized for fast computation, ML AI Media processing. Linux

AWS VPC and subnet:Even though a VPC spans across the entire region, every subnet can only be associated with only one Availability Zone. 